I've got a question from a member the
audience named Jay asking me about the
central concepts of meditation in
ancient Buddhism the ancient form of
Buddhism from which all the modern
variations their religion are derived in
the analytical discussion of religion in
the 21st century we have to do two
things that modern Western academia is
terrible at doing you might even say we
have to do two things that universities
in the 21st century are incapable of
doing I think it's very difficult for
anyone to really struggle with the
limitations that are set on rational
inquiry in the 21st century the
limitation that present prevents people
prevents the professor or the students
from bluntly singing or engaging in a
discussion of the fact that this is
[ __ ] anyone who is just gonna pick
up the raw doctrine of Mormonism and
frankly analyze it and discuss in the
classroom has to deal with [ __ ] and
what if he used slightly more polite
terms or not it really needs to be that
rough that incisive and that honest we
need to deal with the extent to which
religious doctrine is untrue and bad and
dangerous and wrong and it wasn't even
written by people who had good
intentions the founders of Mormonism did
not have good intentions that's one
that's reasoned enough in historical
memory that we know with great precision
exactly what happened and why but going
to any university classroom and you will
see the tremendous difficulty with which
professors struggle to very vaguely
communicate to their students that
there's something wrong even with
Scientology let alone Islam let alone
Buddhism right and it's not enough to
just communicate to your students here
is what's wrong with this religion which
is it's gonna be a lot that's going to
be most of what you deal with in the
province of religion
um it's then also necessary to explore
why did people enjoy making themselves
slaves to this ideologies
so it's easy for us here on YouTube to
do step one of that rational course it's
easy for us to sit down and say ok let's
talk about all the ways in which
Mormonism it's just [ __ ]
let's sit down here and really talk in a
forthright and open way about why
Scientology is just [ __ ] we can do
that here on YouTube and culturally if
not politically professors and students
cannot do that in university classroom
and it's it's a really fundamental
problem with our universities and the
universities do indeed train people in
terms of not just how to think but more
importantly the custom of what is
thinkable and what is unthinkable and I
can remember a time when some of those
habits of mine were conditioning to me
when I was very young and was just like
oh no you can't question the ways in
which Islam is a good religion or
Muslims are good people or you can't
question the idea of the extent to which
the people who created the religion in
the first place had good intentions and
then all the problems with the religion
must just be later corruptions or later
misinterpretations the crap that do it
this kind of you know charitable polite
apologetics in the history religion no
no no here on YouTube at least step one
we can be blunt about but then there's a
further challenge because once we have
faced up to openly and honestly that
most of what we're talking about here
it's just the accumulation of pernicious
lies with the veneer of respectability
put over it repackage and sold to you as
custom tradition faith right we then
have to explain to ourselves and others
we have to engage in a kind of analysis
version why did people not only accept
this they didn't just accept this
grudgingly they became passionate
enthusiastic proponents and export
exponents of these beliefs they made
themselves slaves to this ideology
willingly
right you have to look at the popularity
of Islam the popularity of Mormonism the
popularity even of Scientology and the
passion of the faithful the people is
described with what their motives are
what it means to them what it is they
feel is good about it and this is by no
means to say that you look at the
advantages and disadvantages of religion
in my opinion what you have to
understand is both of these categories
are disadvantages both of these are
tragic reflections of human nature I
mean which is more terrible the ways in
which the doctrine itself is [ __ ] or
the ways in which human beings are eager
to subjugate themselves a base
themselves make themselves slaves
proponents exponents missionaries for
these doctrines these are two different
categories of tragedy it's not that it's
not that we're talking about advantages
and disadvantages I'm two contrasting
sides of the coin okay there's a
footnote here I have to add about
Buddhist meditation and jhana itself if
you search right now within Google
you'll find various people talking about
jhana telling you what this word jhana
means allegedly telling you what the
history or foundation of Buddhist
meditation --all practices right I'm
gonna put out here the hypothesis that
not a single one of these videos is
based on quoting and explaining to you
what the actual ancient text says so if
you search YouTube for Jesus Christ
sermon a sermon on the mount explained I
think you can find many many many
YouTube videos of Christian preachers
explaining to you what the Sermon on the
Mount meant but directly quoting the
text may be discussing with you issues
and translation from Greek to English
whatever may be wants them all the talk
but a few Hebrew words where it's really
exegesis it's explaining the meaning of
the text and then explaining what the
doctor means today where it's very
directly based on that
by contrast what you are seeing in
Buddhism with attempts to explain jhana
and meditation reflects a profound
discomfort with the text there was a
professor I don't know if he's now
retired or deceased Lance cousins he is
a great example summer he went through
his whole career telling students oh no
no there's um there's nothing in the
Pali Canon about meditation this new
texted I can we were talking about this
with other specialists other experts who
actually read and translated the
original ancient text it's like somebody
should do a research project to figure
out who was the first person to make
this excuse because it really is a gurus
excuse it really is saying oh no you
have to trust me you have to trust what
I'm telling you because there's nothing
in the ancient text that's gonna answer
this question like you have to believe
in my personal authority my personal
charismatic interpretation erosion and
that's not true at all all the
professors who stood up in university
classrooms around the world and all the
Buddhist monks who tell you that
meditation is not explained or not
recorded in the ancient texts of the
Pali cannon they are lying to you and
they're only two possibilities either
they're they know that they're lying or
they're unaware that they're lying
because they're imitating something that
another professor told them or another
Buddhist monk we're told told them or
both they've learned this this behavior
but many people will go to any lengths
to avoid dealing with what the ancient
scriptures actually say in Buddhism and
that's why you get bizarre claims made
like for example Buddhists will tell you
including Buddhist monks and including
white people who have PhDs in Buddhism
and our professors there are Buddhists
who tell you with no humor with no irony
they'll tell you in Buddhism there is no
legend of the creation of the universe
of how the world was yes there is yes
there is and most of them have read it
they've actually read the text they're
lying to you because they're
uncomfortable dealing with that text
that's implications their religion many
of them will just lie to you straight to
your face that will say oh no there is
no
doctrine of hell there's no concept of
Hell in the ancient scriptures in the
Pali Canada
whoo does anyone want to estimate how
many pages describe hell or what what
percentage of all the pages in the H
cannon are devoted to the description of
Hell it's a lot ok there are very
detailed descriptions of Hell and again
with those people when someone like me
talk to them I can ask them you know
have you actually not read one page out
of the pumpkin or are you intentionally
lying about this are you aware that
you're lying
so the simple facts of what the texts
say about altered states of
consciousness nobody wants to deal with
and that's your first big red flag that
as soon as you start looking into this
you're gonna find that it's [ __ ]
it's just [ __ ] now in the same way
let's just say the self-help elements of
the Church of Scientology are [ __ ]
however there's then this next step of
offering an analysis of why do people
like it why do people become
enthusiastic why they become faithful
towards it so on and so forth right and
there is something there to be analyzed
you know what Scientology what what the
cult of Scientology offers people to
hook them and draw them in and what they
find rewarding about it that may be
worth understanding although we can only
take that second step if we've already
established look the doctrine itself is
[ __ ] there's no way there's no way
to proceed to step two without really in
a sound and sincere way dealing with
step one I would say that also by the
way about the rise and fall of the cult
of Rajneesh also known as the cult of
osho it is quite interesting to look at
interviews with people who were members
of that cult and try to figure out what
was it that liked about it why did they
make excuses for all the things that
were wrong about it why did they become
passionate devotees of this why did they
from my perspective make themselves
slaves of this ideology and that's all
the more tragic right I mean but you
could you could apply this even to
political extremism in our own times but
you can't take that step without really
first fully recognizing
the doctrine itself is bunk
and hokum so in this way I have to
acknowledge the following if you squeeze
your arm muscle not even lifting an
object if you just sit there right now
and close your eyes and mentally clench
the muscle in your arm as tightly as you
can for as long as you can and then you
release it you will feel a very peculiar
kind of tingling in your arm the mental
exercises that induce these so-called
altered states of consciousness are very
much the mental equivalent of this right
so it's kind of hilarious to me the
extent to which people who are
proponents of the jhanas tend to indict
themselves through in this way revealing
that it doesn't matter what object you
meditate on what it is you're meditating
about just as long as you're clenching
your mind in this way that you have this
super concentrated use of your mind you
will get the same results so this is one
aspect of it and this is why Buddhists
modern but us today certainly they are
just as comfortable endorsing navel
gazing that's a form of meditation if
you didn't know and it's not just a
sarcastic term in English navel gazing
wall gazing visualizing something like a
white circle in your fine a completely
abstract just just imagine this white
circle and then focus on it focus on it
they'll also just as easily endorse
sitting and staring at a skull like you
know where you place an object in for
any focus on meditating on the skull the
idea that just if you keep your mind in
this super concentrated super focused
state of attention that then you're
going to experience an altered state of
consciousness thereafter right this is
very much like using the muscle of your
arm in a kind of strenuous and somewhat
unnatural way and then you have a
completely
meaningless feeling it's a feeling an
altered state of mind is just a feeling
that's all there is to it has no
narrative content that's one element of
what's going on here another is the very
real element of hallucination and the
real experience of making the transition
from being awake to dreaming sometimes
very rapidly now some of you in the
audience won't have experienced these
things some of you will have experienced
them in numerous conditions I have gone
to respectable Chinese Mahayana temples
where they were giving the meditators
hallucinogenic tea one of the temples
what they were doing that I challenged
one of the administrators both say look
you know this contains loosen nuts and
like I know I can read the label on the
tea um you know do you really think it's
ethical or moral to be giving people a
hallucinogenic drug and even though it's
very mild it's not nearly as strong as
LSD and then you sit there and close
your eyes and gee what do you know you
kind of see things you know yeah uh-huh
I have meditated with a Zen master who
was giving me in the other meditator is
a really heavy dose of caffeine just
through traditional basically like a
Japanese tea ceremony it was actually
Korean tradition but style serving tea
in this case wasn't so different so if
you get really pumped up on green tea so
you get a lot of caffeine going and then
you sit there you know in a meditative
posture holding your body completely
still with your mind your eyes closed
your mind is racing because you're high
on this caffeine this is another type of
meditative experience and as many of the
meditative instructors and gurus will
tell you oh it doesn't matter what you
think about you can think about nothing
at all you can keep your mind in this
blank state or focus on a white circle
or in the Zen tradition repeat the same
phrase over and over again they're most
meaningless the most meaningless thing
imaginable
can still get the same results so this
would be like by saying to you my method
of getting this tingling feeling in your
arm it doesn't matter if you squeeze one
object or another in your hand while
flexing the muscle in your arm you'll
still get the same miraculous results
but of course ironically traged there's
nothing there's nothing miraculous with
the results okay um if you have
experience with illness you may have
experienced the extent to which the
human mind will laughs in hallucination
just through exhaustion illness in the
ancient world people were sick all the
time you know very unglamorous diseases
like amoebic dysentery lead to
hallucination i have had from tropical
fever if you just get a fever you can go
straight from being awake into
hallucinating
you know semi dreamlike state and so on
and again you may even with jet lag or
something if you ever the experience if
you're riding a bus you're looking or
you're awake you're awake you're awake
and then whew you're asleep you go
straight from being awake to being
asleep and you're you know it has the
same effect of hallucinating I mean
dreams are much more intense in terms of
narrative content then any drug-induced
hallucination
so you can imagine with a lot of these
ritual traditions we have people who are
sleep deprived they're at least high on
caffeine if not a third if not other
drugs you know if you get people who are
in this upright posture you can very
easily go from being awake and in the
strangely focused state to slipping into
a dreamlike state and what you see is
neither more nor less meaningful than
any dream I can remember reading one
book from one Buddhist monk that was
honest about that and he reflects I
mention this in YouTube video before but
he reflected that in his hallucinations
or in his dreams in his visions if you
like you know he could recognize the
elements of his own fantasy he
recognized that when he met the Buddha
the Buddha resembled a particular style
of statue of art that was his preferred
style of statue of depicting the Buddha
and he knew intellectually that's not
what the Buddha actually looked like in
India that's a style of making stat
that develops centuries later like he he
was capable of interrogating his own
religious experience and discovering it
to be nothing more than a dream or
hallucination
so we have both three components to this
in some there is the sad reality that
the original texts the original doctrine
of the jhanas it's just [ __ ] and the
second step is most of the modern
interpreters proponents of this doctrine
they're aware of the weakness of the
text so they direct your attention away
from it it's like no no no don't read
what the text actually says they're not
going to explain this to you in the same
way a Christian would explain the Sermon
on the Mount but working from the text
and explain to you step by step no no no
no they are much more likely to
misdirect you to talk to you about
something like V pass and now V passing
that doesn't even exist in the ancient
text this is a completely modern
movement it's really anti Buddhist or
unblessed
but it's been attached on me but no no
don't don't pay attention to what the
hate should take say so there's the the
weakness the ancient texts one of the
modern responses is to distract you away
from that direct you away from that and
then try to present you with some kind
of newfangled doctrine of meditation and
then there's the sickening human
psychology of how people get attached to
this their egos latch onto it and they
make themselves slaves to the city ology
I was once in a discussion that included
bhikkhu bodhi famous Buddhist monk
several other people sitting in a circle
and for whatever reason people were
attacking the egotism of people like
myself people who were really had a
scholarly approach to actually studying
the ancient texts and knowing what the
text meant and it was sort of very
self-serving you know they were all
patting themselves on the back as if all
the people in the room except for me you
know they were all profound and wise
enough to not spend their time studying
what the ancient texts actually say so
be like a bunch of Christians saying
their profound enough to just engage in
prayer and not read what the Bible
actually says they don't worry them as
those of that
and you know isn't it sad that studying
the text leads to this terrible ego trip
that you know the people who study the
history of the religion and the actual
doctrine in Scripture that they know
what the religions about and other
people don't that's that's really very
sad as opposed to people who just live
in pious ignorance right and I countered
this argument that he had not just one
person was presenting but several people
were all kind of agreeing with one
another and I said to them look I think
studying the ancient texts you know
someone I should does it it's humbling
because no matter how much you know
you're aware even just by looking at the
books on the Shelf you haven't read yet
you're aware of how much more there is
to know so you see your knowledge in
that context is it got to tell you
something I meet people all the time who
pay for a weekend course in meditation
and who come back literally believing
that they are a bodhisattva that they
are an incarnation of a deity or uh the
future Buddha or whatever people can
convince themselves that they're on
almost any religious ego trip imaginable
because what meditation does is
basically give them an opportunity to
indulge in their own self deceptive
fantasies to indulge in dreaming both
literally and not so literally and
whatever experience they have whether it
be a mild tingling of the mind whether
it be an altered state of consciousness
whether it be as something like the
hallucination
whatever they see whatever they feel
they can cling on to that as a token and
think that most dangerous thought of all
they can think I'm special Hey
what does them is in this sense much
more dangerous than Christianity because
every day millions and millions of
Christians pray but incredibly few have
the delusion that God spoke directly to
them instead what they live with is the
existential terror of the silence of God
that here they are praying and nobody
talks back right and
people do think that God is talking to
them directly they are regarded as
insane there are exceptions there are
Christian cult groups and there are
people who think that there are a
prophet and so on but for the most part
that is the state of Christianity in
21st century and Buddhism is at the
opposite extreme where if somebody sits
down again quite possibly after drinking
a hallucinogenic tea or in whatever
conditions if someone just sits down and
when they're meditating they happen to
see some colors and shapes just some the
mildest level of you know the altered
state of consciousness or others they
just they visualize something anything
they can stand up off of that prayer mat
saying saying that they're on a mission
that they're special that they now have
a sense of purpose that's been revealed
to them that they know something nobody
else knows that they've had revealed to
them some kind of divine and
transcendental wisdom and this motivates
people to suicidal acts of devotion it
is not merely we may say that this way
madness lies but in this way we reveal
the madness that is at the core of
Buddhism both ancient and modern